How to find pi in randomness all around you

Random coin flips, floppy needles and mathematical mysteries reveal pi in new ways

These three techniques will let you estimate pi out of randomness.

Grab something circular, like a cup, measure the distance around the circle, and divide that by the distance across the widest part. What you’ll get is a pretty good estimate of the irrational number pi (3.14159...). But you can also find pi in a series of random coin flips or a collection of needles tossed on a wooden floor. Sometimes the reason pi shows up in randomly generated values is obvious—if there are circles or angles involved, pi is your guy. But sometimes the circle is cleverly hidden, and sometimes the reason pi pops up is a mathematical mystery!

To celebrate Pi Day this year, here are three ways to estimate pi using random chance that you can try out at home. The last one, using coin flips, is brand new—published just in time for Pi Day.

Perhaps the simplest way to randomly estimate pi works like this: take a square with side length 2 and place a circle with radius 1 inside so that it just touches the edges of the square. Then randomly generate points in the square. As you add more and more random points, the proportion of points which end up in the circle will approach π⁄4—the ratio between the area of the circle (pi) and the area of the square (4).

The incidence of pi here is not surprising—it comes directly from the formula for the area of a circle—but the method is a classic example of a Monte Carlo simulation, in which random data are used to approximate an exact calculation.

Suppose I drop a bunch of needles on a hardwood floor with lines spaced one needle length apart. What proportion of the needles can I expect to cross the lines? This question was first posed by Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (or Count of Buffon) in 1733, and the answer is 2⁄π (about 2⁄3).

To find out why, we need to think about a more general question: What if our needle is not a straight line but a squiggle, a square or any other line-drawn shape?

This extended version of the problem is sometimes called “Buffon’s noodle” because noodles come in many more shapes than needles. It turns out that no matter what shape the needle is bent into, we can still expect it, on average, to cross the same number of lines. The expected value of the number of lines crossed is proportional to the length of the needle. In other words, we can expect a collection of needles of length n (of any shape) to cross n times as many lines as the same number of needles of length 1.

So to find the answer to Buffon’s query, all you need to do is pick a clever shape for your needles. This is where the circles come in. If you have lines spaced one unit apart and a needle bent into a circle that has diameter 1, it will always cross the lines exactly twice. The length of the needle making up the circle is pi, and so the probability that a needle of length 1 will cross a line will be the expected value of the number of times the circle crosses—2—divided by the length of the circular needle, giving us 2⁄π.

Pick up a coin and flip it. Record heads or tails. Repeat until you’ve gotten one more head than tails, and record the proportion of heads to total flips. For example, if your first flip was heads, stop right away and record 1. If you flip tails, heads, tails, heads, heads, stop and record ⅗. The expected value of your result, or the average of all your trials if you did infinitely many, is π⁄4. The more trials you average together, the closer you get to π⁄4.

This new method for estimating pi using coin flips was introduced by James Propp, a mathematician at University of Massachusetts Lowell, in a preprint posted online at ArXiv.org last month—just in time for Pi Day! Though the math behind the method is nothing new, the idea to use it to estimate pi with coin flips is.

Hello. This is 6 Minute English from BBC Learning English. I'm Neil. And I'm Becca. How many of our listeners, Neil, do you think love chocolate? Well, I can't think of anyone who doesn't love chocolate. I know I certainly do. Yes, I thought you might say that, having seen your mid-morning snack most days. That's true. I do love a bit of dark chocolate. Do you know, I really like the one that's got some chilli in it. What's your favourite, Becca? Oh, I also love dark chocolate, but chilli is a bit spicy for me. I like it with sea salt. Hmm, that's also good. But now to the stuff that makes chocolate possible. Cocoa - a key ingredient and it's become more expensive in recent years. Now, a new EU law could make chocolate even more expensive. Today we'll talk about how this law could change things for farmers, companies and chocolate lovers, as discussed on the recent BBC World Service programme Business Daily. As always, we'll learn some useful new words and phrases and you'll find all the vocabulary along with a transcript on our website. bbclearningenglish.com Before we get started, Neil, I have a question for you. Europeans are big fans of chocolate, just like us. Around how many tonnes of cocoa beans were imported to Europe in 2023? Was it a) 500,000, b) 2,000,000 tonnes or c) 10,000,000 tonnes? Well, I have no idea, but I'm just going to guess and say 500,000 tonnes. We'll find out if you're right later on. Now, that new EU law that we were talking about earlier would stop companies buying cocoa from land where any trees were cut down in the last six years. The process of cutting down trees is called deforestation. Albert Smith, who owns a small chocolate business, believes that the new law wouldn't change too much for his company. We have all the information on farm level already because the producers that we work with are small plantations that either work through a co-op or social enterprise, and all of our cocoa is already traced back to the plantation. Albert adds that they already know where the cocoa beans come from, as they work with farmers from co-ops or social enterprises. A co-op, in this case, is a farm owned by its workers. A social enterprise is a business that wants to help the community. Because of working with farmers who are part of these organisations, Albert says that the cocoa they buy can already be traced back to the farms. To trace something back to something means to find out where something has come from. Here's Albert Smith again. Mapping means that farmers have to actually provide the geolocations of their plantation. And, you know, for some farmers that are very remote, that comes also with a challenge. Albert suggests that giving a geolocation is difficult for some farmers, as they live in remote places and don't all have mobile phones. Geolocation is data taken from a special device which shows exactly where something is, and the term remote means at a large distance from places where other people live. Because of these changes, the price of chocolate might go up even more, meaning that chocolate lovers like us could really notice the difference in our bank accounts. Reporter, Matthew Kenyon, asked a chocolate lover on the street if they would pay more for their chocolate. Absolutely. I would do that because I think the normal chocolates are way too cheap. Definitely we will pay, we have to pay more because the money will go to the local people, to give them a better life, also to tackle deforestation. And he asked another chocolate lover about whether he looks at where the cocoa beans come from. For me, personally, absolutely not. Out of principle because I want them to be produced most efficiently as possible. The cost is completely irrelevant. But, on principle, I want production to be as efficient as possible. Otherwise, it's a waste of everybody's time. Mixed opinions it seems there, Becca. Whilst one chocolate lover would pay more for chocolate to support farmers and production, the other doesn't worry too much about the cost, but says the production process should be as efficient as possible. OK, time to answer our quiz question. Earlier, I asked you how many tonnes of cocoa were imported to Europe in 2023 and you said 500,000 tonnes. Well, Neil, I'll tell you, it is 2,000,000 tonnes! Wow. Well, I was wrong and that really is a lot. Between us, we've probably eaten a few tonnes already this year. At least, Becca. I'd be interested to know what kind of chocolate our listeners enjoy. Me too! And whether they would be happy to pay more for their favourite chocolate bar. Okay, let's recap some of the vocabulary from this programme. Deforestation is the process of cutting down trees. We heard co-op, which is a farm owned by its workers. A social enterprise is a business that wants to help the community. To trace something back to something is to find out where something's come from. Geolocation is data taken from a device which can show you exactly where a person or thing is. And finally, remote means at a large distance from places where other people live. Once again, our six minutes are up, but if you want to test your knowledge, visit our website bbclearningenglish.com where you'll also find a worksheet and quiz for this episode. Bye! See you next time. Goodbye.